Mining Discrete Sequences
“I am above the weakness of seeking to establish a
sequence of cause and effect.”—Edgar Allan Poe
15.1 Introduction
Discrete sequence data can be considered the categorical analog of timeseries data. As in
the case of timeseries data, it contains a single contextual attribute that typically corresponds to time. However, the behavioral attribute is categorical. Some examples of relevant
applications are as follows:
1. System diagnosis: Many automated systems generate discrete sequences containing
information about the system state. Examples of system state are UNIX system calls,
aircraft system states, mechanical system states, or network intrusion states.
2. Biological data: Biological data typically contains sequences of amino acids. Specific
patterns in these sequences may define important properties of the data.
3. User-action sequences: Various sequences are generated by user actions in different
domains.
(a) Web logs contain long sequences of visits to Websites by different individuals.
(b) Customer transactions may contain sequences of buying behavior. The individual
elements of the sequence may correspond to the identifiers of the different items,
or sets of identifiers of different items that are bought.
(c) User actions on Websites, such as online banking sites, are frequently logged.
This case is similar to that of Web logs, except that the logs of banking sites
often contain more detailed information for security purposes.
Biological data is a special kind of sequence data, in which the contextual data is not
temporal but relates to the placement of the different attributes. Methods for temporal
C. C. Aggarwal, Data Mining: The Textbook, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-14142-8 15 493
c Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
494 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
sequence data can be leveraged for biological sequence data and vice versa. A discrete
sequence is formally defined as follows:
Definition 15.1.1 (Discrete Sequence Data) A discrete sequence Y1 ... Yn of length n
and dimensionality d, contains d discrete feature values at each of n different timestamps
t1 ...tn. Each of the n components Yi contains d discrete behavioral attributes (y1
i ...yd
i ),
collected at the ith timestamp.
In many practical scenarios, the timestamps t1 ...tn may simply be tick values indexed from
1 through n. This is especially true in cases such as biological data, in which the contextual
attribute represents placement. In general, the actual timestamps are rarely used in most
sequence mining applications, and the discrete sequence values are assumed to be equally
spaced in time. Furthermore, most of the analytical techniques are designed for the case
where d = 1. Such discrete sequences are also referred to as strings. This chapter will,
therefore, use these terms interchangeably. Most of the discussion in this chapter focuses on
these more common and simpler cases.
In some applications, such as sequential pattern mining, each Yi is not a vector but a set
of unordered values. This is a variation from Definition 15.1.1. Therefore, the notation Yi
(without an overline) will be used to denote a set rather than a vector. For example, in a
supermarket application, the set Yi may represent a set of items bought by the customer at
a given time. There is no temporal ordering among the items in Yi. In a Web log analysis
application, the set Yi represents the Web pages browsed by a given user in a single session.
Thus, discrete sequences can be defined in a wider variety of ways than timeseries data.
This is because of the ability to define sets on discrete items. Each position in the sequence
is also referred to as an element and is composed of individual items in the set. Throughout
this chapter, the word “element” will refer to one of the sets of items within the sequence,
including a 1-itemset.
These variations in definitions arise out of a natural variation in the different kinds of
application scenarios. This chapter will study the different problem definitions relevant to
discrete sequence mining. The four major problems of pattern mining, clustering, outlier
analysis, and classification, are each defined differently for discrete sequence mining than for
multidimensional data. These different definitions will be studied in detail. A few models,
such as Hidden Markov Models, are used widely across many different application domains.
These commonly used models will also be studied in this chapter.
This chapter is organized as follows. Section 15.2 introduces the problem of sequential
pattern mining. Sequence clustering algorithms are discussed in Sect. 15.3. The problem of
sequence outlier detection is discussed in Sect. 15.4. Section 15.5 introduces Hidden Markov
Models (HMM) that can be used for either clustering, classification, or outlier detection. The
problem of sequence classification is addressed in Sect. 15.6. Section 15.7 gives a summary.
15.2 Sequential Pattern Mining
The problem of sequential pattern mining can be considered the temporal analog of frequent pattern mining. In fact, most algorithms for frequent pattern mining can be directly
adapted to sequential pattern mining with a systematic approach, although the latter problem is more complex. As in frequent pattern mining, the original motivating application for
sequential pattern mining was market basket analysis, although the problem is now used in
a wider variety of temporal application domains, such as computer systems, Web logs, and
telecommunication applications.
15.2. SEQUENTIAL PATTERN MINING 495
The sequential pattern mining problem is defined on a set of N sequences. The ith
sequence contains ni elements in a specific temporal order. Each element contains a set
of items. The complex element is, therefore, a set, such as a basket of items bought by a
customer. For example, consider the sequence:
{Bread, Butter}, {Butter, M ilk}, {Bread, Butter, Cheese}, {Eggs}
Here, {Bread, Butter} is an element, and Bread is an item inside the element. A subsequence of this sequence is also a temporal ordering of sets, such that each element in the
subsequence is a subset of an element in the base sequence in the same temporal order. For
example, consider the following sequence:
{Bread, Butter}, {Bread, Butter}, {Eggs}
The second sequence is a subsequence of the first because each element in the second
sequence can be matched to a corresponding element in the first sequence by a subset
relationship, so that the matching elements are in the same temporal order. Unlike transactions that are sets, note that sequences (and the mined subsequences) contain ordered
(and possibly repeated) elements, each of which is itself like a transaction. For example,
{Bread, Butter} is a repeated element in one of the aforementioned sequences, and it may
correspond to two separate visits of a customer to the supermarket at different times. Formally, a subsequence relationship is defined as follows:
Definition 15.2.1 (Subsequence) Let Y = Y1 ...Yn and Z = Z1 ...Zk be two
sequences, such that all the elements Yi and Zi in the sequences are sets. Then, the
sequence Z is a subsequence of Y, if k elements Yi1 ...Yik can be found in Y, such that
ii < i2 <...< ik, and Zr ⊆ Yir for each r ∈ {1 ...k}.
Consider a sequence database T containing a set of N sequences Y1 ... YN . The support
of a subsequence Z with respect to database T is defined in an analogous way to frequent
pattern mining.
Definition 15.2.2 (Support) The support of a subsequence Z is defined as the fraction
of sequences in the database T = {Y1 ... YN }, that contain Z as a subsequence.
The sequential pattern mining problem is that of identifying all subsequences that satisfy
the required level of minimum support minsup.
Definition 15.2.3 (Sequential Pattern Mining) Given a sequence database T =
{Y1,... YN }, determine all subsequences whose support with respect to the database T is
at least minsup.
It is easy to see that this definition is very similar to that of the definition of association
pattern mining in Chap. 4. The minimum support value minsup can be specified either as
an absolute value, or as a relative support value. As in the case of frequent pattern mining,
a relative value will be assumed, unless otherwise specified.
An Apriori-like algorithm, known as Generalized Sequential Pattern Mining (GSP), was
proposed as the first algorithm for sequential pattern mining. This algorithm is very similar
to Apriori, in terms of how candidates are generated and counted. In fact, many frequent
pattern mining algorithms, such as TreeProjection and FP-growth, have direct analogs in
sequential pattern mining. This section describes only the GSP algorithm in detail. A later
496 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
Algorithm GSP(Sequence Database: T , Minimum Support: minsup)
begin
k = 1;
Fk = { All Frequent 1-item elements };
while Fk is not empty do begin
Generate Ck+1 by joining pairs of sequences in Fk, such that
removing an item from the first element of one sequence matches the sequence
obtained by removing an item from the last element of the other;
Prune sequences from Ck+1 that violate downward closure;
Determine Fk+1 by support counting on (Ck+1, T ) and retaining
sequences from Ck+1 with support at least minsup;
k = k + 1;
end;
return(∪k
i=1Fi);
end
Figure 15.1: The GSP algorithm is related to the Apriori algorithm. The reader is encouraged to compare this pseudocode with the Apriori algorithm described in Fig. 4.2 of Chap. 4
section provides a broad overview of how enumeration tree algorithms can be generalized
to sequential pattern mining.
The GSP and Apriori algorithms are similar, except that the former needs to be designed
for finding frequent sequences rather than sets. First, the notion of the length of candidates
needs to be defined in sequential pattern mining. This notion needs to be defined more carefully, because the individual elements in the sequence are sets rather than items. The length
of a candidate or a frequent sequence is equal to the number of items (not elements) in the
candidate. In other words, a k-sequence) Y1 ...Yr is a sequence with length r
i=1 |Yi| = k.
Thus, {Bread, Butter, Cheese}, {Cheese, Eggs} is a 5-candidate, even though it contains
only 2 elements. This is because this sequence contains 5 items in total, including a repetition of “Cheese” in two distinct elements. A (k − 1)-subsequence of a k-candidate can be
generated by removing an item from any element in the k-sequence. The Apriori property
continues to hold for sequences because any (k − 1)-subsequence of a k-sequence will have
support at least equal to that of the latter. This sets the stage for a candidate generateand-test approach, together with downward closure pruning, which is analogous to Apriori.
The GSP algorithm starts by generating all frequent 1-item sequences by straightforward counting of individual items. This set of frequent 1-sequences is represented by F1.
Subsequent iterations construct Ck+1 by joining pairs of sequence patterns in Fk. The join
process is different from association pattern mining because of the greater complexity in
the definition of sequences. Any pair of frequent k-sequences S1 and S2 can be joined, if
removing an item from the first element in one frequent k-sequence S1 is identical to the
sequence obtained by removing an item from the last element in the other frequent sequence
S2. For example, the two 5-sequences S1 = {Bread, Butter, Cheese}, {Cheese, Eggs} and
S2 = {Bread, Butter}, {M ilk, Cheese, Eggs} can be joined because removing “Cheese”
from the first element of S1 will result in an identical sequence to that obtained by removing “Milk” from the last element of S2. Note that if S2 were a 5-candidate with 3 elements
corresponding to S2 = {Bread, Butter}, {Cheese, Eggs}, {M ilk}, then a join can also
be performed. This is because removing the last item from S2 creates a sequence with 2
15.2. SEQUENTIAL PATTERN MINING 497
elements and 4 items, which is identical to S1. However, the nature of the join will be somewhat different in these cases. In general, cases where the last element of S2 is a 1-itemset
need to be treated specially. The following rules can be used to execute the join:
1. If the last element of S2 is a 1-itemset, then the joined candidate may be obtained by
appending the last element of S2 to S1 as a separate element. For example, consider
the following two sequences:
S1 = {Bread, Butter, Cheese}, {Cheese, Eggs}
S2 = {Bread, Butter}, {Cheese, Eggs}, {M ilk}
The join of the two sequences is {Bread, Butter, Cheese}, {Cheese, Eggs}, {M ilk}.
2. If the last element of S2 is not a 1-itemset, but a superset of the last element of S1,
then the joined candidate may be obtained by replacing the last element of S1 with
the last element of S2. For example, consider the following two sequences:
S1 = {Bread, Butter, Cheese}, {Cheese, Eggs}
S2 = {Bread, Butter}, {M ilk, Cheese, Eggs}
The join of the two sequences is {Bread, Butter, Cheese}, {M ilk, Cheese, Eggs}.
These key differences from Apriori joins are a result of the temporal complexity and the
set-based elements in sequential patterns. Alternative methods exist for performing the
joins. For example, an alternative approach is to remove one item from the last elements
of both S1 and S2 to check whether the resulting sequences are identical. However, in this
case multiple candidates might be generated from the same pair. For example, a, b, c and
a, b, d can join to any of a, b, c, d, a, b, d, c, and a, b, cd. The first join rule of removing
the first item from S1 and the last item from S2 has the merit of having a unique join result.
For any specific join rule, it is important to ensure exhaustive and nonrepetitive generation
of candidates. As we will see later, a similar notion to the frequent-pattern enumeration
tree can be introduced in sequential pattern mining to ensure exhaustive and nonrepetitive
candidate generation.
The Apriori trick is then used to prune sequences that violate downward closure. The
idea is to check if each k-subsequence of a candidate in Ck+1 is present in Fk. The candidate
set is pruned of those candidates that do not satisfy this closure property. The frequent
(k + 1)-candidate sequences Ck+1 are then checked against the sequence database T , and
the support is counted. The counting of the support is executed according to the notion of a
subsequence, as presented in Definition 15.2.1. All frequent candidates in Ck+1 are retained
in Fk+1. The algorithm terminates, when no frequent sequences are generated in Fk+1 in a
particular iteration. All the frequent sequences generated during the different iterations of
the levelwise approach are returned by the algorithm. The pseudocode of the GSP algorithm
is illustrated in Fig. 15.1.
15.2.1 Frequent Patterns to Frequent Sequences
It is easy to see that the Apriori and GSP algorithms are structurally similar. This is not
a coincidence. The basic structure of the frequent pattern and sequential pattern mining
problems are similar. Aside from the differences in the support counting approach, the main
difference between GSP and Apriori is in terms of how candidates are generated. The join
498 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
LEVEL 0 < >
<{a}> <{b}> <{c}> <{d}> LEVEL 1
TTTT
<{a,b}> <{a,c}> <{a}{c}> <{b}{a}> <{b}{b}> <{b,c}> < {b}{c} > <{c}{a}> <{c}{b}> LEVEL 2
S ST T T S T T T
LEVEL 3 <{a,b,c}> <{a,b}{c}> <{b}{a,b}> <{b}{a}{b}> <{b,c}{a}> <{b,c}{b}> <{c}{a,b}>
S T S T T S
LEVEL 3
T
Figure 15.2: The equivalent of an enumeration tree for sequential pattern mining
generation in GSP is defined in terms of two separate cases. The two cases correspond to
temporal extensions and set-wise extensions of candidates.
As discussed in Chap. 4, the Apriori algorithm can be viewed as an enumeration tree
algorithm. It is also possible to define an analogous candidate tree in sequential pattern
mining, albeit with a somewhat different structure than the enumeration tree in frequent
pattern mining. The key differences in join-based candidate generation between Apriori
and GSP algorithms translate to differences in the structure and growth of the candidate
tree in sequential pattern mining. In general, candidate trees for sequential pattern mining
are more complex because they need to accommodate both temporal and set-wise growth
of sequences. Therefore, the definition of candidate extensions of a tree-node needs to be
changed. A node for sequence S can be extended to a lower-level node in one of two ways:
1. Set-wise extension: In this case, an item is added to the last element in the sequence
S to create a candidate pattern. Therefore, the number of elements does not increase.
For an item to be added to the last element of S, it must satisfy two properties; (a)
the item successfully extends the parent sequence of S in the candidate tree with
either a set-wise or temporal extension to another frequent sequence, and (b) the item
must be lexicographically later than all items in the last element of S. As in frequent
pattern mining, a lexicographic ordering of items needs to be fixed up front.
2. Temporal extension: A new element with a single item is added to the end of the
current sequence S. As in the previous case of set-wise extensions, any frequent item
extension of the parent of S may be used to extend S (condition (a)). However, the
added item need not be lexicographically later than the items in the last element of
sequence S.
These two kinds of extensions can be shown to be equivalent to the two kinds of joins
in the GSP algorithm. As in frequent pattern mining, the candidate extensions of a node
are a subset of the corresponding frequent extensions of its parent node. An example of the
frequent portion of the candidate tree for sequential pattern mining is illustrated in Fig. 15.2.
Note the greater complexity of the tree, because of set-wise and temporal addition of items
at each level of the tree. The set-wise extensions are marked as “S”, and the temporal
extensions are marked as “T” on the corresponding tree edges. A particularly illuminating
discussion on this topic may be found in [243], on which this example is based.
15.2. SEQUENTIAL PATTERN MINING 499
It is possible to convert any enumeration tree algorithm for frequent pattern mining to
a sequential pattern mining algorithm by systematically making appropriate modifications.
These changes account for the different structure of the candidate tree in sequential pattern
mining compared to that in frequent pattern mining. This candidate tree is implicitly generated by all sequential pattern mining algorithms, such as GSP and PrefixSpan. Because
the enumeration tree1 is the generic framework describing all frequent pattern mining algorithms, it implies that virtually all frequent pattern mining algorithms can be modified to
the sequential pattern mining scenario. For example, the work in [243] generalizes TreeProjection, and the PrefixSpan algorithm generalizes FP-growth. Savasere et al.’s vertical
format [446] has also been generalized to sequential pattern mining algorithms. The main
difference between these algorithms is the different efficiency of counting with the use of a
variety of data structures, projection-based reuse tricks, and different candidate-tree exploration strategies such as breadth-first or depth-first, rather than a fundamental difference
in search space size. The size of the candidate tree is fixed, although pruning strategies such
as the Apriori-style pruning can reduce its size.
The notion of projection-based reuse can also be extended to sequential pattern mining. The projected representation T (P) of the sequence database T is associated with a
sequential pattern P in the candidate enumeration tree (as modified for sequential pattern
mining). Then, each sequence Y∈T in the database is projected at P according to the
following rules:
1. The sequential pattern P needs to be a subsequence of Y for the projection of Y to
be included in the projected database T (P).
2. All items that are either not in the last element of P, or are not successful frequent
extensions (either temporal or set-wise) of the parent of P are not included in the
projection of Y because they are irrelevant for counting frequent extensions of P.
3. The earliest temporal occurrence of P in Y, as a subsequence, is determined. Let the
last element Pr in P be matched to the element Yk in Y according to this subsequence
matching. Then, the first element of the projected representation of Y is equal to
the set of items in Yk − Pr that are lexicographically later than all items in Pr. If
the resulting element Q is null, then it is not included in the projection of Y. This
first element, if non-null, is special because it may only be used for counting set-wise
extensions of element Pr in the enumeration tree and is, therefore, denoted as Q
with an underscore in front of it.
4. The remaining elements in the projected sequence after Q correspond to the elements
in Y occurring temporally after the last matched element Yk in Y. All these elements
are included in the projection of Y after removing the irrelevant items discussed in
step 2. These remaining elements can be used for counting either set-wise extensions
of the last element Pr in P, or temporal extensions of P. For any of these remaining
elements (other than Q) to be used for counting the set-wise extensions of Pr, the
element would already need to contain Pr.
The projected database T (P) can be used to count the frequent extensions of P more efficiently and determine the frequent ones. As in the frequent pattern mining, this projection
can be performed successively in top-down fashion during the construction an enumerationtree-like candidate structure. The projected database at a node can be generated by recursively projecting the database at its parent. The basic approach is exactly analogous to
1See discussion in Sect. 4.4.4.5 of Chap. 4. A similar argument applies to sequential pattern mining.
500 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
projection-based frequent pattern mining algorithms discussed in Chap. 4. The algorithm
starts with a candidate tree ET which is the null node with the entire sequence database
T at that node. This tree is extended repeatedly using the following step until no nodes
remain in ET for further extension.
Select a node (P, T (P)) in ET for extension;
Generate the candidate temporal and set-wise extensions of P;
Determine the frequent extensions of P using support counting on T (P);
Extend ET with frequent extensions and their recursively projected databases;
The final candidate tree ET contains all the frequent sequential patterns. Different
strategies for selecting the node P can lead to the generation of the candidate tree in a
different order such as breadth-first or depth-first order. This simplified and generalized
description is roughly based on the frameworks independently proposed in [243] and PrefixSpan, which are closely related. The reader is referred to the bibliographic notes for
discussion of the specific algorithms.
15.2.2 Constrained Sequential Pattern Mining
In many cases, additional constraints are imposed on the sequential patterns, such as constraints on gaps between successive elements of the sequence. One solution is to use the
unconstrained GSP algorithm, and then, as a postprocessing step, remove all subsequences
not satisfying the constraint. However, this brute-force approach is a very inefficient solution because the number of constrained patterns may be orders of magnitude smaller than
the unconstrained patterns. Therefore, the incorporation of the constraints directly into the
GSP algorithm, during the candidate-generation or support-counting step, is significantly
more efficient. Depending on the nature of the constraints, the changes required to the GSP
algorithm may be minor, or significant. In all cases, the support-counting procedure for
Fk needs to be modified. The constraints are explicitly checked during the support counting. This reduces the number of frequent patterns generated, and makes the process more
efficient than the brute-force method. However, the incorporation of such constraints may
sometimes result in invalidation of the downward closure property of the mined patterns.
In such cases, appropriate changes may need to be made to the GSP algorithm. In cases
where the downward closure property is not violated, the GSP algorithm can be used with
very minor modifications for constraint checking during support counting.
An important constraint that does not violate the downward closure property is the
maxspan constraint. This constraint specifies that the time difference between the first
and last elements of a subsequence must be no larger than maxspan. Therefore, the GSP
algorithm can be used directly, with the modification that the constraint is checked during
support counting. Thus, the approach works with a much smaller set of subsequences in
each step and is generally more efficient than the brute-force method.
Another common constraint in sequential pattern mining is the maximum gap constraint.
This is also referred to as the maxgap constraint. Note that all (k−1)-subsequences of a particular frequent k-sequence may not be valid because of the maximum gap constraint. This
is somewhat problematic because the Apriori principle cannot be used effectively. For example, the subsequence a1a5 is not supported by the transaction database sequence a1a2a3a4a5
under the maxgap value of 1, because the gap value between a1 and a5 is 3. However, the
subsequence a1a3a5 is supported by the same transaction database sequence under this
maxgap value. It is, therefore, possible for a1a5 to have lower support than a1a3a5. Thus,
15.3. SEQUENCE CLUSTERING 501
Apriori pruning cannot be applied. However, the sequence obtained by dropping items from
the first or last elements of a frequent sequence will always be frequent. Therefore, the specific join-based approach discussed in this chapter can still be used to exhaustively generate
all candidates without losing any frequent patterns. A modified pruning rule is used. While
checking (k − 1)-subsequences of a candidate for pruning, only subsequences containing
the same number of elements as the candidate are checked. In other words, elements containing 1 item cannot be removed from the candidate for checking its subsequences. Such
subsequences are referred to as contiguous subsequences. A noteworthy special case is one
in which maxgap = 0. This case is often used for determining timeseries motifs after a time
series has been converted to a discrete sequence using methods discussed in Sect. 14.4 of
Chap. 14.
Another constraint of interest is the minimum gap constraint, or mingap constraint
between successive elements. A minimum gap constraint between successive elements will
always satisfy the downward closure property. Therefore, the GSP approach can be used
with very minor modifications. The only modification is that this constraint is checked
during support counting. This generates a smaller set of subsequences Fk. The join and
pruning steps remain unchanged. The bibliographic notes contain pointers to many other
interesting constraints such as the window-size constraint.
15.3 Sequence Clustering
As in the case of timeseries data, the clustering of sequences is heavily dependent on the
definition of similarity. When a similarity function has been defined, many of the traditional multidimensional methods such as k-medoids and graph-based methods can be easily
adapted to sequence data. It should be pointed out that these two methods can be used for
virtually any data type, and are dependent only on the choice of distance function.
Similarity measures for sequence data have been defined in Chap. 3. The most common
similarity functions used for sequence data are as follows:
1. Match-based measure: This measure is equal to the number of matching positions
between the two sequences. This can be meaningfully computed only when the two
sequences are of equal length, and a one-to-one correspondence exists between the
positions.
2. Dynamic time warping (DTW): In this case, the number of nonmatches between the
two sequences can be used with dynamic time warping. The dynamic time warping
(DTW) method is discussed in detail in Sect. 3.4.1.3 of Chap. 3. The idea is to stretch
and shrink the time dimension dynamically to account for the varying speeds of data
generation for different series.
3. Longest common subsequence (LCSS): As the name of this measure suggests, the
longest matching subsequence between the two sequences is computed. This is then
used to measure the similarity between the two sequences. The LCSS method is discussed in detail in Sect. 3.4.2.2 of Chap. 3.
4. Edit distance: This is defined as the cost of edit operations required to transform
one sequence into another. The edit distance measure is described in Sect. 3.4.2.1 of
Chap. 3. A number of alignment methods, such as BLAST, are specifically designed
for biological sequences. Pointers to these methods may be found in the bibliographic
notes.
502 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
5. Keyword-based similarity: In this case, a k-gram representation is used, in which
each sequence is represented by a bag of segments of length k. These k-grams are
extracted from the original data sequences by using a sliding window of length k on
the sequences. Each such k-gram represents a new “keyword,” and a tf-idf representation can be used in terms of these keywords. If desired, the infrequent k-grams can be
dropped. Any text-based, vector-space similarity measure, discussed in Chap. 13, may
be used. Since the ordering of the segments is no longer used after the transformation,
such an approach allows the use of a wider range of data mining algorithms. In fact,
any text mining algorithm can be used on this transformation.
6. Kernel-based similarity: Kernel-based similarity is particularly useful for SVM classification. Some examples of kernel-based similarity are discussed in detail in section 15.6.4.
The different measures are used in different application-specific scenarios. Many of these
scenarios will be discussed in this chapter.
15.3.1 Distance-Based Methods
When a distance or similarity function has been defined, the k-medoids method can be
generalized very simply to sequence data. The k-medoids method is agnostic as to the
choice of data type and the similarity function because it is designed as a generic hillclimbing approach. In fact, the CLARANS algorithm, discussed in Sect. 7.3.1 of Chap. 7,
can be easily generalized to work with any data type. The algorithm selects k representative sequences from the data, and assigns each data point to their closest sequence, using
the selected distance (similarity) function. The quality of the representative sequences is
improved iteratively with the use of a hill-climbing algorithm.
The hierarchical methods, discussed in Sect. 6.4 of Chap. 6, can also be generalized
to any data type because they work with pairwise distances between the different data
objects. The main challenge of using hierarchical methods is that they require O(n2) pairwise
distance computations between n objects. Distance function computations on sequence data
are generally expensive because they require expensive dynamic programming methods.
Therefore, the applicability of hierarchical methods is restricted to smaller data sets.
15.3.2 Graph-Based Methods
Graph-based methods are a general approach to clustering that is agnostic to the underlying
data type. The transformation of different data types to similarity graphs is described in
Sect. 2.2.2.9 of Chap. 2. The broader approach in graph-based methods is as follows:
1. Construct a graph in which each node corresponds to a data object. Each node is
connected to its k-nearest neighbors, with a weight equal to the similarity between
the corresponding pairs of data objects. In cases where a distance function is used, it
is converted to a similarity function as follows:
wij = e−d(Oi,Oj )2/t2
(15.1)
Here, d(Oi, Oj ) represents the distance between the objects Oi and Oj and t is a
parameter.
15.3. SEQUENCE CLUSTERING 503
2. The edges are assumed to be undirected, and any parallel edges are removed by dropping one of the edges. Because the distance functions are assumed to be symmetric,
the parallel edges will have the same weight.
3. Any of the clustering or community detection algorithms discussed in Sect. 19.3 of
Chap. 19 may be used for clustering nodes of the newly created graph.
After the nodes have been clustered, these clusters can be mapped back to clusters of data
objects by using the correspondence between nodes and data objects.
15.3.3 Subsequence-Based Clustering
The major problem with the aforementioned methods is that they are based on similarity
functions that use global alignment between the sequences. For longer sequences, global
alignment becomes increasingly ineffective because of the noise effects of computing similarity between pairs of long sequences. Many local portions of sequences are noisy and
irrelevant to similarity computations even when large portions of two sequences are similar.
One possibility is to design local alignment similarity functions or use the keyword-based
similarity method discussed earlier.
A more direct approach is to use frequent subsequence-based clustering methods. Some
related approaches also use k-grams extracted from the sequence instead of frequent subsequences. However, k-grams are generally more sensitive to noise than frequent subsequences.
The idea is that the frequent subsequences represent the key structural characteristics that
are common across different sequences. After the frequent subsequences have been determined, the original sequences can be transformed into this new feature space, and a “bagof-words” representation can be created in terms of these new features. Then, the sequence
objects can be clustered in the same way as any text-clustering algorithm. The overall
approach can be described as follows:
1. Determine the frequent subsequences F from the sequence database D using any
frequent sequential pattern mining algorithm. Different applications may vary in the
specific constraints imposed on the sequences, such as a minimum or maximum length
of the determined sequences.
2. Determine a subset FS from the frequent subsequences F based on an appropriate
selection criterion. Typically, a subset of frequent subsequences should be selected, so
as to maximize coverage and minimize redundancy. The idea is to use only a modest
number of relevant features for clustering. For example, the notion of Frequent Summarized Subsequences (FSS) is used to determine condensed groups of sequences [505].
The bibliographic notes contain specific pointers to these methods.
3. Represent each sequence in the database as a “bag of frequent subsequences” from
FS. In other words, the transformed representation of a sequence contains all frequent
subsequences from FS that it contains.
4. Apply any text-clustering algorithm on this new representation of the database of
sequences. Text-clustering algorithms are discussed in Chap. 13. The tf-idf weighting
may be applied to the different features, as discussed in Chap. 13.
The aforementioned discussion is a broad overview of frequent subsequence-based clustering,
although the individual steps are implemented in different ways by different methods. The
key differences among the different algorithms are in terms of methodology for feature
504 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
Algorithm CLUSEQ(Sequence Database: D, Similarity Threshold: t)
begin
k = f = 1;
Let C1 be a singleton cluster with randomly chosen sequence;
repeat
Add ka = k · f new singleton clusters containing sequences
that are as different as possible from existing clusters/each other;
k = k + ka;
Assign (if possible) each sequence in D to each cluster in
C1 ... Ck for which the similarity is at least t;
Eliminate the kr clusters containing less than minthresh
sequences uniquely assigned to them;
k = k − kr;
f = max{ka−kr,0}
ka ;
until no change in clustering result;
return clusters C1 ... Ck;
end
Figure 15.3: The simplified CLUSEQ Algorithm
construction and the choice of the text-clustering algorithm. The CONTOUR method [505]
uses a two-level hierarchical clustering, where fine-grained microclusters are generated in
the first step. Then, these microclusters are agglomerated into higher-level clusters. The
bibliographic notes contain pointers to specific instantiations of this framework.
15.3.4 Probabilistic Clustering
Probabilistic clustering methods are based on the generative principle, that a symbol in a
given sequence is generated with a probability defined by statistical correlations with the
symbols before it. This is based on the general principle of Markovian Models. Therefore,
the similarity between a sequence and a cluster is computed using the generative probability
of the symbols within that cluster. After a similarity function has been defined between a
cluster and a sequence, it can be used to create a distance-based algorithm. The CLUSEQ
algorithm is based on this principle.
15.3.4.1 Markovian Similarity-Based Algorithm: CLUSEQ
The CLUstering SEQuences (CLUSEQ) algorithm is based on the broader principle of
Markovian Models. Markovian models are used to define a similarity function between a
sequence and cluster. The CLUSEQ algorithm can otherwise be considered a similaritybased iterative partitioning algorithm. While traditional partitioning algorithms fix the
number of clusters over multiple iterations, this is not the case in CLUSEQ. The CLUSEQ
algorithm starts with only a single cluster. A carefully controlled number of new clusters
containing individual sequences are added in each iteration, and older ones are removed
when they are deemed to be too similar to existing clusters. The initial growth in the
number of clusters is rapid but it slows down over the course of the algorithm. It is even
possible for the number of clusters to shrink in later iterations. One advantage of this
approach is that the algorithm can automatically determine the natural number of clusters.
15.3. SEQUENCE CLUSTERING 505
Instead of using the number of clusters as an input parameter, the CLUSEQ algorithm
works with a similarity threshold t. A sequence is assigned to a cluster, if its similarity to the
cluster exceeds the threshold t. Sequences may be assigned to any number of clusters (or no
cluster) as long as the similarity is greater than t. The CLUSEQ algorithm has three main
steps corresponding to addition of new clusters, assignment of sequences to clusters, and
elimination of clusters. These steps are repeated iteratively until there is no change in the
clustering result. A simplified version2 of the CLUSEQ algorithm is described in Fig. 15.3.
A detailed description of the individual steps is provided below.
1. Cluster addition: The number of clusters added is k · f, where k is the number of
clusters at the end of the last iteration. The value of f is in the range (0, 1), and is
computed as follows. Let ka be the number of clusters added in the previous iteration,
and let kr be the number of clusters removed because of elimination of overlapping
clusters in the previous iteration. Then, the value of f is computed as follows:
f = max{ka − kr, 0}
ka
(15.2)
The rationale for this is that when the algorithm reaches its “natural” number of
clusters, eliminations will dominate. In such cases, f will be small or 0, and few new
clusters need to be added. On the other hand, in cases where the current number of
clusters is significantly lower than the “natural” number of clusters in the data, the
value of f should be close to 1. In earlier iterations, the number of added clusters is
much larger than the number of removed clusters, which results in rapid growth.
The new clusters created are singleton clusters. The sequences that are as different as
possible from both the existing clusters and each other are selected. Therefore pairwise similarity needs to be computed between each unclustered sequence and other
clusters/unclustered sequences. Because it can be expensive to compute pairwise similarity between the clusters and all unclustered sequences, a sample of unclustered
sequences is used to restrict the scope of new seed selection. The approach for computing similarity will be described later.
2. Sequence assignment to clusters: Sequences are assigned to clusters for which the similarity to the cluster is larger than a user-specified threshold t. The original CLUSEQ
algorithm provides a way to adjust the threshold t as well, though the description in
this chapter provides only a simplified version of the algorithm, where t is fixed and
specified by the user. A given sequence may be assigned to either multiple clusters or
may remain unassigned to any cluster. The actual similarity computation is performed
using a Markovian similarity measure. This measure will be described later.
3. Cluster elimination: Many clusters are highly overlapping because of assignment of
sequences to multiple clusters. It is desired to restrict this overlap to reduce redundancy in the clustering. If the number of sequences that are unique to a particular
cluster is less than a predefined threshold, then such a cluster is eliminated.
The only step that remains to be described is the computation of the Markovian similarity
measure between sequences and clusters. The idea is that if a sequence of symbols S =
s1s2 ...sn is similar to a cluster Ci, then it should be “easy” to generate S using the
2The original CLUSEQ algorithm also adjusts the similarity threshold t iteratively to optimize results.
506 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
conditional distribution of the symbols inside the cluster. Then, the probability P(S|Ci) is
defined as follows:
P(S|Ci) = P(s1|Ci) · P(s2|s1, Ci)...P(sn|s1 ...sn−1, Ci) (15.3)
This is the generative probability of the sequence S for cluster Ci. Intuitively, the term
P(sj |s1 ...sj−1, Ci) represents the fraction of times that sj follows s1 ...sj−1 in cluster Ci.
This term can be estimated in a data-driven manner from the sequences in Ci. When a
cluster is highly similar to a sequence, this value will be high. A relative similarity can
be computed by comparing with a sequence generation model in which all symbols are
generated randomly in proportion to their presence in the full data set. The probability of
such a random generation is given by n
j=1 P(sj ), where P(sj ) is estimated as the fraction
of sequences containing symbol sj . Then, the similarity of S to cluster Ci is defined as
follows:
sim(S, Ci) = P(S|Ci)
n
j=1 P(sj ) (15.4)
One issue is that many parts of the sequence S may be noisy and not match the cluster
well. Therefore, the similarity is computed as the maximum similarity of any contiguous
segment of S to Ci. In other words, if Skl be the contiguous segment of S from positions k
to l, then the final similarity SIM(S, Ci) is computed as follows:
SIM(S, Ci) = max1≤k≤l≤nsim(Skl, Ci) (15.5)
The maximum similarity value can be computed by computing sim(Skl, Ci) over all pairs
[k,l]. This is the similarity value used for assigning sequences to their relevant clusters.
One problematic issue is that the computation of each of the terms P(sj |s1 ...sj−1, Ci)
on the right-hand side of Eq. 15.3 may require the examination of all the sequences in the
cluster Ci for probability estimation purposes. Fortunately, these terms can be estimated
efficiently using a data structure, referred to as Probabilistic Suffix Trees. The CLUSEQ
algorithm always dynamically maintains the Probabilistic Suffix Trees (PST) whenever new
clusters are created or sequences are added to clusters. This data structure will be described
in detail in Sect. 15.4.1.1.
15.3.4.2 Mixture of Hidden Markov Models
This approach can be considered the string analog of the probabilistic models discussed in
Sect. 6.5 of Chap. 6 for clustering multidimensional data. Recall that a generative mixture
model is used in that case, where each component of the mixture has a Gaussian distribution.
A Gaussian distribution is, however, appropriate only for generating numerical data, and is
not appropriate for generating sequences. A good generative model for sequences is referred
to as Hidden Markov Models (HMM). The discussion of this section will assume the use of
HMM as a black box. The actual details of HMM will be discussed in a later section. As we
will see later in Sect. 15.5, the HMM can itself be considered a kind of mixture model, in
which states represent dependent components of the mixture. Therefore, this approach can
be considered a two-level mixture model. The discussion in this section should be combined
with the description of HMMs in Sect. 15.5 to provide a complete picture of HMM-based
clustering.
The broad principle of a mixture-based generative model is to assume that the data
was generated from a mixture of k distributions with the probability distributions G1 ... Gk,
where each Gi is a Hidden Markov Model. As in Sect. 6.5 of Chap. 6, the approach assumes
15.4. OUTLIER DETECTION IN SEQUENCES 507
the use of prior probabilities α1 ...αk for the different components of the mixture. Therefore,
the generative process is described as follows:
1. Select one of the k probability distributions with probability αi where i ∈ {1 ...k}.
Let us assume that the rth one is selected.
2. Generate a sequence from Gr, where Gr is a Hidden Markov Model.
One nice characteristic of mixture models is that the change in the data type and corresponding mixture distribution does not affect the broader framework of the algorithm. The
analogous steps can be applied in the case of sequence data, as they are applied in multidimensional data. Let Sj represent the jth sequence and Θ be the entire set of parameters to
be estimated for the different HMMs. Then, the E-step and M-step are exactly analogous
to the case of the multidimensional mixture model.
1. (E-step) Given the current state of the trained HMM and priors αi, determine the
posterior probability P(Gi|Sj , Θ) of each sequence Sj using the HMM generative probabilities P(Sj |Gi, Θ) of Sj from the ith HMM, and priors α1 ...αk in conjunction with
the Bayes rule. This is the posterior probability that the sequence Sj was generated
by the ith HMM.
2. (M-step) Given the current probabilities of assignments of data points to clusters, use
the Baum–Welch algorithm on each HMM to learn its parameters. The assignment
probabilities are used as weights for averaging the estimated parameters. The Baum–
Welch algorithm is described in Sect. 15.5.4 of this chapter. The value of each αi is
estimated to be proportional to average assignment probability of all sequences to
cluster i. Thus, the M-step results in the estimation of the entire set of parameters Θ.
Note that there is an almost exact correspondence in the steps used here, and to those used
for mixture modeling in Sect. 6.5 of Chap. 6. The major drawback of this approach is that
it can be rather slow. This is because the process of training each HMM is computationally
expensive.
15.4 Outlier Detection in Sequences
Outlier detection in sequence data shares a number of similarities with timeseries data. The
main difference between sequence data and timeseries data is that sequence data is discrete,
whereas timeseries data is continuous. The discussion in the previous chapter showed that
time series outliers can be either point outliers, or shape outliers. Because sequence data
is the discrete analog of timeseries data, an identical principle can be applied to sequence
data. Sequence data outliers can be either position outliers or combination outliers.
1. Position outliers: In position-based outliers, the values at specific positions are predicted by a model. This is used to determine the deviation from the model and predict
specific positions as outliers. Typically, Markovian methods are used for predictive outlier detection. This is analogous to deviation-based outliers discovered in timeseries
data with the use of regression models. Unlike regression models, Markovian models
are better suited to discrete data. Such outliers are referred to as contextual outliers
because they are outliers in the context of their immediate temporal neighborhood.
508 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
2. Combination outliers: In combination outliers, an entire test sequence is deemed to be
unusual because of the combination of symbols in it. This could be the case because
this combination may rarely occur in a sequence database, or its distance (or similarity) to most other subsequences of similar size may be very large (or small). More
complex models, such as Hidden Markov Models, can also be used to model the frequency of presence in terms of generative probabilities. For a longer test sequence,
smaller subsequences are extracted from it for testing, and then the outlier score of
the entire sequence is predicted as a combination of these values. This is analogous to
the determination of unusual shapes in timeseries data. Such outliers are referred to
as collective outliers because they are defined by combining the patterns from multiple
data items.
The following section will discuss these different types of outliers.
15.4.1 Position Outliers
In the case of continuous timeseries data discussed in the previous chapter, an important
class of outliers was designed by determining significant deviations from expected values
at timestamps. Thus, these methods intimately combine the problems of forecasting and
deviation-detection. A similar principle applies to discrete sequence data, in which the discrete positions at specific timestamps can be predicted with the use of different models.
When a position has very low probability of matching its forecasted value, it is considered
an outlier. For example, consider an RFID application, in which event sequences are associated with product items in a superstore with the use of semantic extraction from RFID
tags. A typical example of a normal event sequence is as follows:
PlacedOnShelf, RemovedFromShelf, CheckOut, ExitStore.
On the other hand, in a shoplifting scenario, the event sequence may be unusually different.
An example of an event sequence in the shoplifting scenario is as follows:
PlacedOnShelf, RemovedFromShelf, ExitStore.
Clearly, the sequence symbol ExitStore is anomalous in the second case but not in the first
case. This is because it does not depict the expected or forecasted value for that position in
the second case. It is desirable to detect such anomalous positions on the basis of expected
values. Such anomalous positions may appear anywhere in the sequence and not necessarily
in the last element, as in the aforementioned example. The basic problem definition for
position outlier detection is as follows:
Definition 15.4.1 Given a set of N training sequences D = T1 ...TN , and a test sequence
V = a1 ...an, determine if the position ai in the test sequence should be considered an
anomaly based on its expected value.
Some formulations do not explicitly distinguish between training and test sequences. This
is because a sequence can be used for both model construction and outlier analysis when it
is very long.
Typically, the position ai can be predicted in temporal domains only from the positions
before ai, whereas in other domains, such as biological data, both directions may be relevant. The discussion below will assume the temporal scenario, though generalization to the
placement scenario (as in biological data) is straightforward by examining windows on both
sides of the position.
15.4. OUTLIER DETECTION IN SEQUENCES 509
Just as regression modeling of continuous streams uses small windows of past history,
discrete sequence prediction also uses small windows of the symbols. It is assumed that the
prediction of the values at a position depends upon this short history. This is known as
the short memory property of discrete sequences, and it generally holds true across a wide
variety of temporal application domains.
Definition 15.4.2 (Short Memory Property) For a sequence of symbols V =
a1 ...ai ..., the value of the probability P(ai|a1 ...ai−1) is well approximated by
P(ai|ai−k ...ai−1) for some small value of k.
After the value of P(ai|ai−k ...ai−1) is estimated, a position in a test sequence can be
flagged as an outlier, if it has very low probability on the basis of the models derived from
the training sequences. Alternatively, if a different symbol (than one present in the test
sequence) is predicted with very high probability, then that position can be flagged as an
outlier.
This section will discuss the use of Markovian models for the position outlier detection
problem. This model exploits the short memory property of sequences to explicitly model
the sequences as a set of states in a Markov Chain. These models represent the sequencegeneration process with the use of transitions in a Markov Chain defined on the alphabet
Σ. This is a special kind of Finite State Automaton, in which the states are defined by a
short (immediately preceding) history of the sequences generated. Such models correspond
to a set of states A that represent the different kinds of memory about the system events.
For example, in first-order Markov Models, each state represents the last symbol from the
alphabet Σ that was generated in the sequence. In kth order Markov Models, each state
corresponds to the subsequence of the last k symbols an−k ...an−1 in the sequence. Each
transition in this model represents an event an, the transition probability of which from
the state an−k ...an−1 to the state an−k+1 ...an is given by the conditional probability
P(an|an−k ...an−1). A Markov Model can be depicted as a set of nodes representing the
states and a set of edges representing the events that cause movement from one state to
another. The probability of an edge provides the conditional probability of the corresponding
event. Clearly, the order of the model encodes the memory length of the string segment
retained for the modeling process. First-order models correspond to the least amount of
retained memory.
To understand how Markov Models work, the previous example of tracking items with
RFID tags will be revisited. The actions performed an item can be viewed as a sequence
drawn on the alphabet Σ = {P, R, C, E}. The semantic meaning of each of these symbols
is illustrated in Fig. 15.4. A state of an order-k Markov model corresponds to the previous
k (action) symbols of the sequence drawn on the alphabet Σ = {P, R, C, E}. Examples of
different states along with transitions are illustrated in Fig. 15.4. Both a first-order and
a second-order model have been illustrated in the figure. The edge transition probabilities
are also illustrated in the figure. These are typically estimated from the training data. The
transitions that correspond to the shoplifting anomaly are marked in both models. In each
case, it is noteworthy that the corresponding transition probability for the actual shoplifting
event is very low. This is a particularly simple example, in which a memory of one event
is sufficient to completely represent the state of an item. This is not the case in general.
For example, consider the case of a Web log in which the Markov Models correspond to
sequences of Web pages visited by users. In such a case, the probability distribution of the
next Web page visited depends not just on the last page visited, but also on the other
preceding visits by the user.
510 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
P R C P (0.61) C (0.38) E (1.0) E
P = PLACED ON SHELF
R (1.0)
E (0.01)
ANOMALOUS EVENT
(SHOPLIFTING) R = REMOVED FROM SHELF
C = CHECKOUT
E = EXIT STORE FIRST ORDER MARKOV MODEL
PR RC CE C (0.38) E (1.0)
0)
P (0
R (1.0
0.61)
RP
RE
SECOND ORDER MARKOV MODEL
Figure 15.4: Markov model for the RFID-based shoplifting anomaly
An observation from Fig. 15.4 is that the number of states in the second-order model
is larger than that in the first-order model. This is not a coincidence. As many as |Σ|
k
states may exist in an order-k model, though this provides only an upper bound. Many of
the subsequences corresponding to these states may either not occur in the training data,
or may be invalid in a particular application. For example, a PP state would be invalid
in the example of Fig. 15.4 because the same item cannot be sequentially placed twice on
the shelf without removing it at least once. Higher-order models represent complex systems
more accurately at least at a theoretical level. However, choosing models of a higher order
degrades the efficiency and may also result in overfitting.
15.4.1.1 Efficiency Issues: Probabilistic Suffix Trees
It is evident from the discussion in the previous sections that the Markovian and rule-based
models are equivalent, with the latter being a simpler and easy-to-understand heuristic
approximation of the former. Nevertheless, in both cases, the challenge is that the number
of possible antecedents of length k can be as large as |Σ|
k. This can make the methods slow,
when a lookup for a test subsequence ai−k ...ai−1 is required to determine the probability
of P(ai|ai−k ...ai−1). It is expensive to either compute these values on the fly, or even
to retrieve their precomputed values, if they are not organized properly. The Probabilistic
Suffix Tree (PST) provides an efficient approach for retrieval of such precomputed values.
The utility of probabilistic suffix trees is not restricted to outlier detection, but is also
applicable to clustering and classification. For example, the CLUSEQ algorithm, discussed
in Sect. 15.3.4.1, uses PST to retrieve these prestored probability values.
Suffix trees are a classical data structure that store all subsequences in a given database.
Probabilistic suffix trees represent a generalization of this structure that also stores the
conditional probabilities of generation of the next symbol for a given sequence database. For
order-k Markov Models, a suffix tree of depth at most k will store all the required conditional
15.4. OUTLIER DETECTION IN SEQUENCES 511
ROOT
( P(X), P(Y))
X Y
X Y
( P(X|X), P(Y|X)) ( P(X|Y), P(Y|Y))
X X Y Y
XY YY
( P(X|XX), P(Y|XX)) ( P(X|YY), P(Y|YY)) ( P(X|YX), P(Y|YX)) ( P(X|XY), P(Y|XY)
X XX X Y YYY
XX YX XY YY
XXX YXX XYX YYX XXY YXY XYY YYY ( P(X ( P(X ( P(X ( P(X ( P(X ( P(X ( P(X ( P(X|XXX), P(Y|X |YXX), P(Y|Y |XYX), P(Y|X |YYX), P(Y|YY |XXY), P(Y|X |YXY), P(Y|YX |XYY), P(Y|X |YYY), P(Y|YY
XXX))
XX))
XYX))
YX))
XXY))
XY))
YY))
YY))
Figure 15.5: Probabilistic suffix tree
probability values for the kth order Markovian models, including the conditionals for all
lower-order Markov Models. Therefore, such a structure encodes all the information required
for variable-order Markov Models as well. A key challenge is that the number of nodes in
such a suffix tree can be as large as k
i=0 |Σ|
i
, an issue that needs to be addressed with
selective pruning.
A probabilistic suffix tree is a hierarchical data structure representing the different suffixes of a sequence. A node in the tree with depth k represents a suffix of length k and
is, therefore, labeled with a sequence of length k. The parent of a node ai−k ...ai corresponds to the sequence ai−k+1 ...ai. The latter is obtained by removing the first symbol
from the former. Each edge is labeled with the symbol that needs to be removed to derive
the sequence at the parent node. Thus, a path in the tree corresponds to suffixes of the
same sequence. Each node also maintains a vector Σ of probabilities that correspond to
the conditional probability of the generation of any symbol from Σ = {σ1 ...σ|Σ|} after
that sequence. Therefore, for a node corresponding to the sequence ai−k ...ai, and for each
j ∈ {1 ... |Σ|}, the values of P(σj |ai−k ...ai) are maintained. As discussed earlier, this corresponds to the conditional probability that σj appears immediately after ai−k ...ai, once
the latter sequence has already been observed. This provides the generative probability crucial to the determination of position outliers. Note that this generative probability is also
useful for other algorithms such as the CLUSEQ algorithm discussed earlier in this chapter.
An example of a suffix tree with the symbol set Σ = {X, Y } is illustrated in Fig. 15.5.
The two possible symbol-generation probabilities at each node corresponding to either of
the symbols X and Y are placed next to the corresponding nodes. It is also evident that
a probabilistic suffix tree of depth k encodes all the transition probabilities for Markovian
models up to order k. Therefore, such an approach can be used for higher-order Markovian
models.
512 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
The probabilistic suffix true is pruned significantly to improve its compactness. For
example, suffixes that correspond to very low counts in the original data can be pruned
from consideration. Furthermore, nodes with low generative probabilities of their underlying sequences can be pruned from consideration. The generative probability of a sequence
a1 ...an is approximated as follows:
P(a1 ...an) = P(a1) · P(a2|a1)...P(an|a1 ...an−1) (15.6)
For Markovian models of order k<n, the value of P(ar|a1 ...ar−1) in the equation above
is approximated by P(ar|ar−k ...ar−1) for any value of k less than r. To create Markovian
models of order k or less, it is not necessary to keep portions of the tree with depth greater
than k.
Consider the sequence a1 ...ai ...an, in which it is desired to test whether position ai is
a position outlier. Then, it is desired to determine P(ai|a1 ...ai−1). It is possible that the
suffix a1 ...ai−1 may not be present in the suffix tree because it may have been pruned from
consideration. In such cases, the short memory property is used to determine the longest
suffix aj ...ai−1 present in the suffix tree, and the corresponding probability is estimated
by P(ai|aj ...ai−1). Thus, the probabilistic suffix tree provides an efficient way to store and
retrieve the relevant probabilities. The length of the longest path that exists in the suffix
tree containing a nonzero probability estimate of P(ai|aj ...ai−1) also provides an idea of
the level of rarity of this particular sequence of events. Positions that contain only short
paths preceding them in the suffix tree are more likely to be outliers. Thus, outlier scores
may be defined from the suffix tree in multiple ways:
1. If only short path lengths exist in the (pruned) suffix tree corresponding to a position
ai and its preceding history, then that position is more likely be an outlier.
2. For the paths of lengths 1 ...r that do exist in the suffix tree for position ai, a combination score may be used based on the models of different orders. In some cases, only
lower-order scores are combined. In general, the use of lower-order scores is preferable,
since they are usually more robustly represented in the training data.
15.4.2 Combination Outliers
In combination outliers, the goal is to determine unusual combinations of symbols in the
sequences. Consider a setting, where a set of training sequences is provided, together with
a test sequence. It is desirable to determine whether a test sequence is an anomaly, based
on the “normal” patterns in the training sequences. In many cases, the test sequences may
be quite long. Therefore, the combination of symbols in the full sequence may be unique
with respect to the training sequences. This means that it is hard to characterize “normal”
sequences on the basis of the full sequence. Therefore, small windows are extracted from the
training and test sequences for the purpose of comparison. Typically, all windows (including
overlapping ones) are extracted from the sequences, though it is also possible to work with
nonoverlapping windows. These are referred to as comparison units. The anomaly scores
are defined with respect to these comparison units. Thus, unusual windows in the sequences
are reported. The following discussion will focus exclusively on determining such unusual
windows.
Some notations and definitions will be used to distinguish between the training database,
test sequence, and the comparison units.
1. The training database is denoted by D, and contains sequences denoted by T1 ...TN .
15.4. OUTLIER DETECTION IN SEQUENCES 513
2. The test sequence is denoted by V .
3. The comparison units are denoted by U1 ...Ur. Typically, each Ui is derived from
small, contiguous windows of V . In domain-dependent cases, U1 ...Ur may be provided
by the user.
The model may be a distance-based, or frequency-based or may be a Hidden Markov Model.
Each of these will be discussed in subsequent sections. Because Hidden Markov Models are
general constructs that are used for different problems such as clustering, classification, and
outlier detection, they will be discussed in a section of their own, immediately following this
section.
15.4.2.1 Distance-Based Models
In distance-based models, the absolute distance (or similarity) of the comparison unit is
computed to equivalent windows of the training sequence. The distance of the k-th nearest
neighbor window in the training sequence is used to determine the anomaly score. In the
context of sequence data, many proximity-functions are similarity functions rather than distance functions. In the former case, higher values indicate greater proximity. Some common
methods for computing the similarity between a pair of sequences are as follows:
1. Simple matching coefficient: This is the simplest possible function and determines the
number of matching positions between two sequences of equal length. This is also
equivalent to the Hamming distance between a pair of sequences.
2. Normalized longest common subsequence: The longest common subsequence can be
considered the sequential analog of the cosine distance between two ordered sets.
Let T1 and T2 be two sequences, and the length of (unnormalized) longest common
subsequence between T1 and T2 be denoted by L(T1, T2). The unnormalized longest
common subsequence can be computed using methods discussed in Sect. 3.4.2 of
Chap. 3. Then, the value NL(T1, T2) of the normalized longest common subsequence
is computed by normalizing L(T1, T2) with the underlying sequence lengths in a way
similar to the cosine computation between unordered sets:
NL(T1, T2) = L(T1, T2)
|T1| · |T2| (15.7)
The advantage of this approach is that it can match two sequences of unequal lengths.
The drawback is that the computation process is relatively slow.
3. Edit distance: The edit distance is one of the most common similarity functions used
for sequence matching. This similarity function is discussed in Chap. 3. This function measures the distance between two sequences by the minimum number of edits
required to transform one sequence to the other. The computation of the edit distance
can be computationally very expensive.
4. Compression-based dissimilarity: This measure is based on principles of information
theory. Let W be a window of the training data, and W ⊕Ui be the string representing
the concatenation of W and Ui. Let DL(S) < |S| be the description length of any
string S after applying a standard compression algorithm to it. Then, the compressionbased dissimilarity CD(W, Ui) is defined as follows:
CD(W, Ui) = DL(W ⊕ Ui)
DL(W) + DL(Ui) (15.8)
514 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
This measure always lies in the range (0, 1), and lower values indicate greater similarity. The intuition behind this approach is that when the two sequences are very
similar, the description length of the combined sequence will be much smaller than
that of the sum of the description lengths. On the other hand, when the sequences are
very different, the description length of the combined string will be almost the same
as the sum of the description lengths.
To compute the anomaly score for a comparison unit Ui with respect to the training
sequences in T1 ...TN , the first step is to extract equivalent windows from T1 ...TN as
the size of the comparison unit. The k-th nearest neighbor distance is used as the anomaly
score for that window. The unusual windows may be reported, or the scores from different
windows may be consolidated into a single anomaly score.
15.4.2.2 Frequency-Based Models
Frequency-based models are typically used with domain-specific comparison units specified
by the user. In this case, the relative frequency of the comparison unit needs to be measured
in the training sequences and the test sequences, and the level of surprise is correspondingly
determined.
When the comparison units are specified by the user, a natural way of determining the
anomaly score is to test the frequency of the comparison unit Uj in the training and test patterns. For example, when a sequence contains a hacking attempt, such as a sequence of Login
and Password events, this sequence will have much higher frequency in the test sequence,
as compared to the training sequences. The specification of such relevant comparison units
by a user provides very useful domain knowledge to an outlier analysis application.
Let f(T,Uj ) represent the number of times that the comparison unit Uj occurs in the
sequence T. Since the frequency f(T,Uj ) depends on the length of T, the normalized frequency ˆf(T,Uj ) may be obtained by dividing the frequency by the length of the sequence:
ˆf(T,Uj ) = f(T,Uj )
|T|
Then, the anomaly score of the training sequence Ti with respect to the test sequence V is
defined by subtracting the relative frequency of the training sequence from the test sequence.
Therefore, the anomaly score A(Ti,V,Uj ) is defined as follows:
A(Ti,V,Uj ) = ˆf(V,Uj ) − ˆf(Ti, Uj )
The absolute value of the average of these scores is computed over all the sequences in the
database D = T1 ...TN . This represents the final anomaly score.
A useful output of this approach is the specific subset of comparison units specified by
the user that are the most anomalous. This provides intensional knowledge and feedback to
the analyst about why a particular test sequence should be considered anomalous. A method
called TARZAN uses suffix tree representations to efficiently determine all the anomalous
subsequences in a comparative sense between a test sequence and a training sequence.
Readers are referred to the bibliographic notes for pointers to this method.
15.5 Hidden Markov Models
Hidden Markov Models (HMM) are probabilistic models that generate sequences through a
sequence of transitions between states in a Markov chain. Hidden Markov Models are used
15.5. HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS 515
for clustering, classification, and outlier detection. Therefore, the applicability of these models is very broad in sequence analysis. For example, the clustering approach in Sect. 15.3.4.2
uses Hidden Markov Models as a subroutine. This section will use outlier detection as a
specific application of HMM to facilitate understanding. In Sect. 15.6.5, it will also be shown
how HMM may be used for classification.
So how are Hidden Markov Models different from the Markovian techniques introduced
earlier in this chapter? Each state in the Markovian techniques introduced earlier in this
chapter is well defined and is based on the last k positions of the sequence. This state is also
directly visible to the user because it is defined by the latest sequence combination of length
k. Thus, the generative behavior of the Markovian model is always known deterministically,
in terms of the correspondence between states and sequence positions for a particular input
string.
In a Hidden Markov Model, the states of the system are hidden and not directly visible
to the user. Only a sequence of (typically) discrete observations is visible to the user that is
generated by symbol emissions from the states after each transition. The generated sequence
of symbols corresponds to the application-specific sequence data. In many cases, the states
may be defined (during the modeling process) on the basis of an understanding of how the
underlying system behaves, though the precise sequence of transitions may not be known
to the analyst. This is why such models are referred to as “hidden.”
Each state in an HMM is associated with a set of emission probabilities over the symbol
Σ. In other words, a visit to the state j leads to an emission of one of the symbols σi ∈ Σ
with probability θj (σi). Correspondingly, a sequence of transitions in an HMM corresponds
to an observed data sequence. Hidden Markov Models may be considered a kind of mixture
model of the type discussed in Chap. 6, in which the different components of the mixture
are not independent of one another, but are related through sequential transitions. Thus,
each state is analogous to a component in the multidimensional mixture model discussed in
Chap. 6. Each symbol generated by this model is analogous to a data point generated by the
multidimensional mixture model. Furthermore, unlike multidimensional mixture models, the
successive generation of individual data items (sequence symbols) are also not independent
of one another. This is a natural consequence of the fact that the successive states emitting
the data items are dependent on one another with the use of probabilistic transitions. Unlike
multidimensional mixture models, Hidden Markov Models are designed for sequential data
that exhibits temporal correlations.
To better explain Hidden Markov Models, an illustrative example will be used for the
specific problem of using HMMs for anomaly detection. Consider the scenario where a set of
students register for a course and generate a sequence corresponding to the grades received
in each of their weekly assignments. This grade is drawn from the symbol set Σ = {A, B}.
The model created by the analyst is that the class contains students who, at any given
time, are either doers or slackers with different grade-generation probabilities. A student
in a doer state may sometimes transition to a slacker state and vice versa. These represent
the two states in the system. Weekly home assignments are handed out to each student
and are graded with one of the symbols from Σ. This results in a sequence of grades for
each student, and it represents the only observable output for the analyst. The state of a
student represents only a model created by the analyst to explain the grade sequences and
is, therefore, not observable in of itself. It is important to understand that if this model is a
poor reflection of the true generative process, then it will impact the quality of the learning
process.
Assume that a student in a doer state is likely to receive an A grade in a weekly assignment with 80% probability and a B with 20% probability. For slackers, these probability
516 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
GRADE DISTRIBUTION
A = 80 %
B = 20 %
GRADE DISTRIBUTION
A = 20 %
B = 80 %
DOER SLACKER 0.99 0.90
0.01
0.10
SOME EXAMPLES OF STUDENT GRADE SEQUENCES
AAABAAAABAAAA DOER (VERY COMMON)
BBBBABBBABBBB SLACKER (LESS COMMON)
AAABAAABBABBB DOER TURNS SLACKER (VERY RARE)
ABABABABABABA UNPREDICTABLE (EXTREMELY RARE)
Figure 15.6: Generating grade sequences from a Hidden Markov Model
values are reversed. Although these probabilities are explicitly specified here for illustrative
purposes, they need to be learned or estimated from the observed grade sequences for the
different students and are not known a priori. The precise status (state) of any student in
a given week is not known to the analyst at any given time. These grade sequences are,
in fact, the only observable outputs for the analyst. Therefore, from the perspective of the
analyst, this is a Hidden Markov Model, which generates the sequences of grades from an
unknown sequence of states, representing the state transitions of the students. The precise
sequence of transitions between the states can be only estimated for a particular observed
sequence.
The two-state Hidden Markov Model for the aforementioned example is illustrated in
Fig. 15.6. This model contains two states, denoted by doer and slacker, that represent the
state of a student in a particular week. It is possible for a student to transition from one state
to another each week, though the likelihood of this is rather low. It is assumed that set of
initial state probabilities governs the a priori distribution of doers and slackers. This distribution represents the a priori understanding about the students when they join the course.
Some examples of typical sequences generated from this model, along with their rarity level,
are illustrated in Fig. 15.6. For example, the sequence AAABAAAABAAAA is most likely generated by a student who is consistently in a doer state, and the sequence BBBBABBBABBBB is
most likely generated by a student who is consistently in slacker state. The second sequence
is typically rarer than the first because the population mostly contains3 doers. The sequence
AAABAAABBABBB corresponds to a doer who eventually transitions into a slacker. This case
is even rarer because it requires a transition from the doer state to a slacker state, which
has a very low probability. The sequence ABABABABABABA is extremely anomalous because
it does not represent temporally consistent doer or slacker behavior that is implied by the
model. Correspondingly, such a sequence has very low probability of fitting the model.
A larger number of states in the Markov Model can be used to encode more complex
scenarios. It is possible to encode domain knowledge with the use of states that describe
different generating scenarios. In the example discussed earlier, consider the case that doers
sometimes slacks off for short periods and then return to their usual state. Alternatively,
3The assumption is that the initial set of state probabilities are approximately consistent with the steady
state behavior of the model for the particular set of transition probabilities shown in Fig. 15.6.
15.5. HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS 517
GRADE DISTRIBUTION
A = 80 %
B = 20 %
GRADE DISTRIBUTION
A = 20 %
B = 80 %
0.79 DOER SLACKER 0.70
0.01
0.10
0.20 0.40 0.20 0.40
DOER ON
BREAK
SLACKER AT
WORK
GRADE DISTRIBUTION
A = 40 %
B = 60 %
GRADE DISTRIBUTION
A = 60 %
B = 40 %
0.60 0.60
Figure 15.7: Extending the model in Fig. 15.6 with two more states provides greater expressive power for modeling sequences
slackers may sometimes become temporarily inspired to be doers, but may eventually return
to what they are best at. Such episodes will result in local portions of the sequence that
are distinctive from the remaining sequence. These scenarios can be captured with the fourstate Markov Model illustrated in Fig. 15.7. The larger the number of states, the more
complex the scenarios that can be captured. Of course, more training data is required to
learn the (larger number of) parameters of such a model, or this may result in overfitting.
For smaller data sets, the transition probabilities and symbol-generation probabilities are
not estimated accurately.
15.5.1 Formal Definition and Techniques for HMMs
In this section, Hidden Markov Models will be formally introduced along with the associated
training methods. It is assumed that a Hidden Markov Model contains n states denoted
by {s1 ...sn}. The symbol set from which the observations are generated is denoted by
Σ = {σ1 ...σ|Σ|}. The symbols are generated from the model by a sequence of transitions
from one state to the other. Each visit to a state (including self-transitions) generates
a symbol drawn from a categorical4 probability distribution on Σ. The symbol emission
distribution is specific to each state. The probability P(σi|sj ) that the symbol σi is generated
from state sj is denoted by θj (σi). The probability of a transition from state si to sj is
denoted by pij . The initial state probabilities are denoted by π1 ...πn for the n different
states. The topology of the model can be expressed as a network G = (M,A), in which M
is the set of states {s1 ...sn}. The set A represents the possible transitions between the
states. In the most common scenario, where the architecture of the model is constructed
with a domain-specific understanding, the set A is not the complete network. In cases
where domain-specific knowledge is not available, the set A may correspond to the complete
4HMMs can also generate continuous time series, though they are less commonly used in timeseries
analysis.
518 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
network, including self-transitions. The goal of training the HMM model is to learn the
initial state probabilities, transition probabilities, and the symbol emission probabilities from
the training database {T1 ...TN }. Three methodologies are commonly leveraged in creating
and using a Hidden Markov Model:
• Training: Given a set of training sequences T1 ...TN , estimate the model parameters,
such as the initial probabilities, transition probabilities, and symbol emission probabilities with an Expectation-Maximization algorithm. The Baum–Welch algorithm is
used for this purpose.
• Evaluation: Given a test sequence V (or comparison unit Ui), determine the probability that it fits the HMM. This is used to determine the anomaly scores. A recursive
forward algorithm is used to compute this.
• Explanation: Given a test sequence V , determine the most likely sequence of states
that generated this test sequence. This is helpful for providing an understanding of
why a sequence should be considered an anomaly (in outlier detection) or belong
to a specific class (in data classification). The idea is that the states correspond to
an intuitive understanding of the underlying system. In the example of Fig. 15.6, it
would be useful to know that an observed sequence is an anomaly because of the
unusual oscillation of a student between doer and slacker states. This can provide
the intensional knowledge for understanding the state of a system. This most likely
sequence of states is computed with the Viterbi algorithm.
Since the description of the training procedure relies on technical ideas developed for the
evaluation method, we will deviate from the natural order of presentation and present
the training algorithms last. The evaluation and explanation techniques will assume that
the model parameters, such as the transition probabilities, are already available from the
training phase.
15.5.2 Evaluation: Computing the Fit Probability for Observed
Sequence
One approach for determining the fit probability of a sequence V = a1 ...am would be to
compute all the nm possible sequences of states (paths) in the HMM, and compute the
probability of each, based on the observed sequence, symbol-generation probabilities, and
transition probabilities. The sum of these values can be reported as the fit probability.
Obviously, such an approach is not practical because it requires the enumeration of an
exponential number of possibilities.
This computation can be greatly reduced by recognizing that the fit probability of the
first r symbols (and a fixed value of the rth state) can be recursively computed in terms of
the corresponding fit probability of first (r − 1) observable symbols (and a fixed (r − 1)th
state). Specifically, let αr(V,sj ) be the probability that the first r symbols in V are generated
by the model, and the last state in the sequence is sj . Then, the recursive computation is
as follows:
αr(V,sj ) = n
i=1
αr−1(V,si) · pij · θj (ar)
This approach recursively sums up the probabilities for all the n different paths for different
penultimate nodes. The aforementioned relationship is iteratively applied for r = 1 ...m.
The probability of the first symbol is computed as α1(V,sj ) = πj · θj (a1) for initializing the
15.5. HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS 519
recursion. This approach requires O(n2 ·m) time. Then, the overall probability is computed
by summing up the values of αm(V,sj ) over all possible states sj . Therefore, the final fit
F(V ) is computed as follows:
F(V ) = n
j=1
αm(V,sj )
This algorithm is also known as the Forward Algorithm. Note that the fit probability has a
direct application to many problems, such as classification and anomaly detection, depending upon whether the HMM is constructed in supervised or unsupervised fashion. By constructing separate HMMs for each class, it is possible to test the better-fitting class for a
test sequence. The fit probability is useful in problems such as data clustering, classification
and outlier detection. In data clustering and classification, the fit probability can be used
to model the probability of a sequence belonging to a cluster or class, by creating a groupspecific HMM. In outlier detection, it is possible to determine poorly fitting sequences with
respect to a global HMM and report them as anomalies.
15.5.3 Explanation: Determining the Most Likely State Sequence
for Observed Sequence
One of the goals in many data mining problems is to provide an explanation for why a
sequence fits part (e.g. class or cluster) of the data, or does not fit the whole data set
(e.g. outlier). Since the sequence of (hidden) generating states often provides an intuitive
explanation for the observed sequence, it is sometimes desirable to determine the most likely
sequence of states for the observed sequence. The Viterbi algorithm provides an efficient way
to determine the most likely state sequence.
One approach for determining the most likely state path of the test sequence V =
a1 ...am would be to compute all the nm possible sequences of states (paths) in the HMM,
and compute the probability of each of them, based on the observed sequence, symbolgeneration probabilities, and transition probabilities. The maximum of these values can be
reported as the most likely path. Note that this is a similar problem to the fit probability
except that it is needed to determine the maximum fit probability, rather than the sum of
fit probabilities, over all possible paths. Correspondingly, it is also possible to use a similar
recursive approach as the previous case to determine the most likely state sequence.
Any subpath of an optimal state path must also be optimal for generating the corresponding subsequence of symbols. This property, in the context of an optimization problem
of sequence selection, normally enables dynamic programming methods. The best possible
state path for generating the first r symbols (with the rth state fixed to j) can be recursively
computed in terms of the corresponding best paths for the first (r − 1) observable symbols
and different penultimate states. Specifically, let δr(V,sj ) be the probability of the best
state sequence for generating the first r symbols in V and also ending at state sj . Then,
the recursive computation is as follows:
δr(V,sj ) = MAXn
i=1δr−1(V,si) · pij · θj (ar)
This approach recursively computes the maximum of the probabilities of all the n different
paths for different penultimate nodes. The approach is iteratively applied for r = 1 ...m.
The first probability is determined as δ1(V,sj ) = πj · θj (a1) for initializing the recursion.
This approach requires O(n2 · m) time. Then, the final best path is computed by using
520 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
the maximum value of δm(V,sj ) over all possible states sj . This approach is, essentially, a
dynamic programming algorithm. In the anomaly example of student grades, an oscillation
between doer and slacker states will be discovered by the Viterbi algorithm as the causality
for outlier behavior. In a clustering application, a consistent presence in the doer state will
explain the cluster of diligent students.
15.5.4 Training: Baum–Welch Algorithm
The problem of learning the parameters of an HMM is a very difficult one, and no known
algorithm is guaranteed to determine the global optimum. However, options are available
to determine a reasonably effective solution in most scenarios. The Baum–Welch algorithm
is one such method. It is also known as the Forward-backward algorithm, and it is an
application of the EM approach to the generative Hidden Markov Model. First, a description
of training with the use of a single sequence T = a1 ...am will be provided. Then, a
straightforward generalization to N sequences T1 ...TN will be discussed.
Let αr(T,sj ) be the forward probability that the first r symbols in a sequence T of length
m are generated by the model, and the last symbol in the sequence is sj . Let βr(T,sj ) be the
backward probability that the portion of the sequence after and not including the rth position
is generated by the model, conditional on the fact that the state for the rth position is sj .
Thus, the forward and backward probability definitions are not symmetric. The forward
and backward probabilities can be computed from model probabilities in a way similar
to the evaluation procedure discussed above in Sect. 15.5.2. The major difference for the
backward probabilities is that the computations start from the end of the sequence in the
backward direction. Furthermore, the probability value β|T|(T,sj ) is initialized to 1 at the
bottom of the recursion to account for the difference in the two definitions. Two additional
probabilistic quantities need to be defined to describe the EM algorithm:
• ψr(T,si, sj ): Probability that the rth position in sequence T corresponds to state si,
the (r + 1)th position corresponds to sj .
• γr(T,si): Probability that the rth position in sequence T corresponds to state si.
The EM procedure starts with a random initialization of the model parameters and then
iteratively estimates (α(·), β(·), ψ(·), γ(·)) from the model parameters, and vice versa. Specifically, the iteratively executed steps of the EM procedure are as follows:
• (E-step) Estimate (α(·), β(·), ψ(·), γ(·)) from currently estimated values of the model
parameters (π(·), θ(·), p..).
• (M-step) Estimate model parameters (π(·), θ(·), p..) from currently estimated values
of (α(·), β(·), ψ(·), γ(·)).
It now remains to explain how each of the above estimations is performed. The values of
α(·) and β(·) can be estimated using the forward and backward procedures, respectively.
The forward procedure is already described in the evaluation section, and the backward
procedure is analogous to the forward procedure, except that it works backward from the
end of the sequence. The value of ψr(T,si, sj ) is equal to αr(T,si)·pij ·θj (ar+1)·βr+1(T,sj )
because the sequence-generation procedure can be divided into three portions corresponding
to that up to position r, the generation of the (r + 1)th symbol, and the portion after the
15.6. SEQUENCE CLASSIFICATION 521
(r+1)th symbol. The estimated values of ψr(T,si, sj ) are normalized to a probability vector
by ensuring that the sum over different pairs [i, j] is 1. The value of γr(T,si) is estimated
by summing up the values of ψr(T,si, sj ) over fixed i and varying j. This completes the
description of the E-step.
The re-estimation formulas for the model parameters in the M-Step are relatively
straightforward. Let I(ar, σk) be a binary indicator function, which takes on the value
of 1 when the two symbols are the same, and 0 otherwise. Then the estimations can be
performed as follows:
π(j) = γ1(T,sj ), pij =
m−1
r=1 ψr(T,si, sj )
m−1
r=1 γr(T,si)
θi
(σk) =
m
r=1 I(ar, σk) · γr(T,si)
m
r=1 γr(T,si)
The precise derivations of these estimations, on the basis of expectation-maximization principles, may be found in [327]. This completes the description of the M-step.
As in all EM methods, the procedure is applied iteratively to convergence. The approach
can be generalized easily to N sequences by applying the steps to each of the sequences,
and averaging the corresponding model parameters in each step.
15.5.5 Applications
Hidden Markov Models can be used for a wide variety of sequence mining problems, such
as clustering, classification, and anomaly detection. The application of HMM to clustering
has already been described in Sect. 15.3.4.2 of this chapter. The application to classification
will be discussed in Sect. 15.6.5 of this chapter. Therefore, this section will focus on the
problem of anomaly detection.
In theory, it is possible to compute anomaly scores directly for the test sequence V ,
once the training model has been constructed from the sequence database D = T1 ...TN .
However, as the length of the test sequence increases, the robustness of such a model diminishes because of the increasing noise resulting from the curse of dimensionality. Therefore,
the comparison units (either extracted from the test sequence or specified by the domain
expert), are used for computing the anomaly scores of windows of the sequence. The anomaly
scores of the different windows can then be combined together by using a simple function
such as determining the number of anomalous window units in a sequence.
Some methods also use the Viterbi algorithm on the test sequence to mine the most likely
state sequence. In some domains, it is easier to determine anomalies in terms of the state
sequence rather than the observable sequence. Furthermore, low transition probabilities
on portions of the state sequence provide anomalous localities of the observable sequence.
The downside is that the most likely state sequence may have a very low probability of
matching the observed sequence. Therefore, the estimated anomalies may not reflect the
true anomalies in the data when an estimated state sequence is used for anomaly detection.
The real utility of the Viterbi algorithm is in providing an explanation of the anomalous
behavior of sequences in terms of the intuitively understandable states, rather than anomaly
score quantification.
15.6 Sequence Classification
It is assumed that a set of N sequences, denoted by S1 ...SN , is available for building the
training model. Each of these sequences is annotated with a class label drawn from {1 ...k}.
This training data is used to construct a model that can predict the label
522 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
of unknown test sequences. Many modeling techniques, such as nearest neighbor classifiers, rule-based methods, and graph-based methods, are common to timeseries and discrete
sequence classification because of the temporal nature of the two data types.
15.6.1 Nearest Neighbor Classifier
The nearest neighbor classifier is used frequently for different data types, including discrete
sequence data. The basic description of the nearest neighbor classifier for multidimensional
data may be found in Sect. 10.8 of Chap. 10. For discrete sequence data, the main difference
is in the similarity function used for nearest neighbor classification. Similarity functions for
discrete sequences are discussed in Sects. 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 of Chap. 3. The basic approach is
the same as in multidimensional data. For any test instance, its k-nearest neighbors in the
training data are determined. The dominant label from these k-nearest neighbors is reported
as the relevant one for the test instance. The optimal value of k may be determined by using
leave-one-out cross-validation. The effectiveness of the approach is highly sensitive to the
choice of the distance function. The main problem is that the presence of noisy portions in
the sequences throw off global similarity functions. A common approach is to use keywordbased similarity in which n-grams are extracted from the string to create a vector-space
representation. The nearest-neighbor (or any other) classifier can be constructed with this
representation.
15.6.2 Graph-Based Methods
This approach is a semisupervised algorithm because it combines the knowledge in the
training and test instances for classification. Furthermore, the approach is transductive
because out-of-sample classification of test instances is generally not possible. Training
and testing instances must be specified at the same time. The use of similarity graphs
for semisupervised classification was introduced in Sect. 11.6.3 of Chap. 11. Graph-based
methods can be viewed as general semisupervised meta-algorithms that can be used for
any data type. The basic approach constructs a similarity graph from both the training and
test instances. A graph G = (V,A) is constructed, in which a node in V corresponds to
each of the training and test instances. A subset of nodes in G is labeled. These correspond
to instances in the training data, whereas the unlabeled nodes correspond to instances in
the test data. Each node in V is connected to its k-nearest neighbors with an undirected
edge in A. The similarity is computed using any of the distance functions discussed in
Sects. 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 of Chap. 3. In the resulting network, a subset of the nodes are labeled,
and the remaining nodes are unlabeled. The specified labels of nodes in N are then used to
predict labels for nodes where they are unknown. This problem is referred to as collective
classification. Numerous methods for collective classification are discussed in Sect. 19.4 of
Chap. 19. The derived labels on the nodes are then mapped back to the data objects. As
in the case of nearest-neighbor classification, the effectiveness of the approach is sensitive
to the choice of distance function used for constructing the graph.
15.6. SEQUENCE CLASSIFICATION 523
15.6.3 Rule-Based Methods
A major challenge in sequence classification is that many parts of the sequence may be
noisy and not very relevant to the class label. In some cases, a short pattern of two symbols
may be relevant to classification, whereas in other cases, a longer pattern of many symbols
may be discriminative for classification. In some cases, the discriminative patterns may not
even occur contiguously. This issue was discussed in the context of timeseries classification
in Sect. 14.7.2.1 of Chap. 14. However, discrete sequences can be converted into binary
timeseries sequences, with the use of binarization. These binary timeseries can be converted
to multidimensional wavelet representations. This is described in detail in Sect. 2.2.2.6, and
the description is repeated here for completeness.
The first step is to convert the discrete sequence to a set of (binary) time series, where
the number of time series in this set is equal to the number of distinct symbols. The second
step is to map each of these time series into a multidimensional vector using the wavelet
transform. Finally, the features from the different series are combined to create a single
multidimensional record. A rule-based classifier is constructed on this multidimensional
representation.
To convert a sequence to a binary time series, one can create a binary string, in which
each position value denotes whether or not a particular symbol is present at a position. For
example, consider the following nucleotide sequence drawn on four symbols:
ACACACTGTGACTG
This series can be converted into the following set of four binary time series corresponding
to the symbols A, C, T, and G, respectively.
10101000001000
01010100000100
00000010100010
00000001010001
A wavelet transformation can be applied to each of these series to create a multidimensional
set of features. The features from the four different series can be appended to create a
single numeric multidimensional record. After a multidimensional representation has been
obtained, any rule-based classifier can be utilized. Therefore, the overall approach for data
classification is as follows:
1. Generate wavelet representation of each of the N sequences to create N numeric
multidimensional representations, as discussed above.
2. Discretize wavelet representation to create categorical representations of the timeseries
wavelet transformation. Thus, each categorical attribute value represents a range of
numeric values of the wavelet coefficients.
3. Generate a set of rules using any rule-based classifier described in Sect. 10.4 of
Chap. 10. The patterns on the left-hand represent the patterns of different granularities defined by the combination of wavelet coefficients on the left-hand side.
When the rule set has been generated, it can be used to classify arbitrary test sequences by
first transforming the test sequence to the same wavelet-based numeric multidimensional
representation. This representation is used with the fired rules to perform the classification.
524 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
Such methods are discussed in Sect. 10.4 of Chap. 10. It is not difficult to see that this
approach is a discrete version of the rule-based classification of time series, as presented in
Sect. 14.7.2.1 of Chap. 14.
15.6.4 Kernel Support Vector Machines
Kernel support vector machines can construct classifiers with the use of kernel similarity
between training and test instances. As discussed in Sect. 10.6.4 of Chap. 10, kernel support
vector machines do not need the feature values of the records, as long as the kernel-based
similarity K(Yi, Yj ) between any pair of data objects are available. In this case, these data
objects are strings. Different kinds of kernels are very popular for string classification.
15.6.4.1 Bag-of-Words Kernel
In the bag-of-words kernel, the string is treated as a bag of alphabets, with a frequency
equal to the number of alphabets of each type in the string. This can be viewed as the
vector-space representation of a string. Note that a text document is also a string, with
an alphabet size equal to the lexicon. Therefore, the transformation Φ(·) can be viewed as
almost equivalent to the vector-space transformation for a text document. If V (Yi) be the
vector-space representation of a string, then the kernel similarity is equal to the dot product
between the corresponding vector space representations.
Φ(Yi) = V (Yi)
K(Yi, Yj ) = Φ(Yi) · Φ(Yj ) = V (Yi) · V (Yj )
The main disadvantage of the kernel is that it loses all the positioning information between
the alphabets. This can be an effective approach for cases where the alphabet size is large.
An example is text, where the alphabet (lexicon) size is of a few hundred thousand words.
However, for smaller alphabet sizes, the information loss can be too significant for the
resulting classifier to be useful.
15.6.4.2 Spectrum Kernel
The bag-of-words kernel loses all the sequential information in the strings. The spectrum
kernel addresses this issue by extracting k-mers from the strings and using them to construct the vector-space representation. The simplest spectrum kernel pulls out all k-mers
from the strings and builds a vector space representation from them. For example, consider
the string ATGCGATGG constructed on the alphabet Σ = {A, C, T, G}. Then, the corresponding spectrum representation for k = 3 is as follows:
ATG(2), TGC(1), GCG(1), CGA(1), GAT(1), TGG(1)
The values in the brackets correspond to the frequencies in the vector-space representation. This corresponds to the feature map Φ(·) used to define the kernel similarity.
It is possible to enhance the spectrum kernel further by adding a mismatch neighborhood
to the kernel. Thus, instead of adding only the extracted k-mers to the feature map, we add
15.6. SEQUENCE CLASSIFICATION 525
all the k-mers that are m mismatches away from the k-mer. For example, at a mismatch
level of m = 1, the following k-mers are added to the feature map for each instance of ATG:
CTG, GTG, TTG, ACG, AAG, AGG, ATC, ATA, ATT
This procedure is repeated for each element in the k-mer, and each of the neighborhood elements are added to the feature map. is procedure is repeated for each element in the k-mer,
and each of the neighborhood elements are added to the feature map. The dot product is
performed on this expanded feature map Φ(·). The rationale for adding mismatches is to
allow for some noise in the similarity computation. The bag-of-words kernel can be viewed
as a special case of the spectrum kernel with k = 1 and no mismatches. The spectrum kernel
can be computed efficiently with the use of either the trie or the suffix tree data structure.
Pointers to such efficient computational methods are provided in the bibliographic notes.
One advantage of spectrum kernels is that they can compute the similarity between two
strings in an intuitively appealing way, even when the lengths of the two strings are widely
varying.
15.6.4.3 Weighted Degree Kernel
The previous two kernel methods directly define a feature map Φ(·) explicitly that largely
ignores the ordering between the different k-mers. The weighted degree kernel directly
defines K(Yi, Yj ), without explicitly defining a feature map Φ(·). This approach is in the
spirit of exploiting the full power of kernel methods. Consider two strings Yi and Yj of the
same length n. Let KMER(Yi, r, k) represent the k-mer extracted from Yi starting from
position r. Then, the weighted degree kernel computes the kernel similarity as the number
of times the k-mers of a maximum specified length, in the two strings at exactly corresponding positions, match perfectly. Thus, unlike spectrum kernels, k-mers of varying lengths are
used, and the contribution of a particular length s is weighted by coefficient βs. In other
words, weighted degree kernel of order k is defined as follows:
K(Yi, Yj ) = 
k
s=1
βs
n−
s+1
r=1
I(KMER(Yi, r, s) = KMER(Yj , r, s)) (15.9)
Here, I(·) is an indicator function that takes on the value of 1 in case of a match,
and 0 otherwise. One drawback of the weighted degree kernel over the spectrum
kernel, is that it requires the two strings Yi and Yj to be of equal length. This can be
partially addressed by allowing shifts in the matching process. Pointers to these enhancements may be found in the bibliographic notes.
15.6.5 Probabilistic Methods: Hidden Markov Models
Hidden Markov Models are an important tool that are utilized in a wide variety of tasks
in sequence analysis. It has already been shown earlier in this chapter, in Sects. 15.3.4.2
and 15.5, how Hidden Markov Models can be utilized for both clustering and outlier detection. In this section, the use of Hidden Markov Models for sequence classification will be
leveraged. In fact, the most common use of HMMs is for the problem of classification. HMMs
are very popular in computational biology, where they are used for protein classification.
526 CHAPTER 15. MINING DISCRETE SEQUENCES
The basic approach for using HMMs for classification is to create a separate HMM for
each of the classes in the data. Therefore, if there are a total of k classes, this will result in
k different Hidden Markov Models. The Baum–Welch algorithm, described in Sect. 15.5.4,
is used to train the HMMs for each class. For a given test sequence, the fit of each of the
k models to the test sequence is determined using the approach described in Sect. 15.5.2.
The best matching class is reported as the relevant one. The overall approach for training
and testing with HMMs may be described as follows:
1. (Training) Use Baum–Welch algorithm of Sect. 15.5.4 to construct a separate HMM
model for each of the k classes.
2. (Testing) For a given test sequence Y , determine the fit probability of the sequence
to the k different Hidden Markov Models, using the evaluation procedure discussed in
Sect. 15.5.2. Report the class, for which the corresponding HMM has the highest fit
probability to the test sequence.
Many variations of this basic approach have been used to achieve different trade-offs between
effectiveness and efficiency. The bibliographic notes contain pointers to some of these methods.
